Key Features of Node.js
Single-Threaded:

Node.js runs on a single thread, which means it uses one main thread to handle all requests.
This can be a benefit because it avoids the overhead of managing multiple threads.
Analogy: Imagine a chef working in a kitchen. Instead of juggling multiple cooking stations (threads), the chef uses a single station and multitasks efficiently (non-blocking).

Non-blocking I/O:

Node.js uses non-blocking I/O (Input/Output), meaning it doesn't wait for tasks like reading from the database or file system to finish before moving to the next task.
This is achieved using an event-driven architecture. While waiting for one operation (like reading a file), Node can process other requests.
Real-World Analogy: Consider a waiter in a restaurant. When you place an order, the waiter doesn't stand idle and wait for your meal to be prepared. They take other orders and attend to other tables while your food is being prepared. This keeps everything moving smoothly.

Event-Driven:

Everything in Node.js is driven by events. For example, when a client sends a request to the server, the request triggers an event in Node.js.
Node.js uses an Event Loop to manage these events.
Cross-Platform:

Node.js can run on various operating systems like Windows, macOS, and Linux.
Rich Ecosystem:

With npm (Node Package Manager), Node.js has access to millions of packages that extend its functionality. This helps speed up development by reusing existing solutions.
Step 2: How Node.js Works
Event Loop & Non-Blocking I/O:
Node.js doesn't execute code sequentially; it processes tasks asynchronously through the Event Loop.
The Event Loop checks for tasks, handles them, and moves on to the next one, without waiting for the first one to finish. Once the task is completed, the result is returned and handled by a callback function.
Example: Non-blocking I/O
Let’s look at a simple example of non-blocking I/O in Node.js:


const fs = require('fs');

// Non-blocking readFile
fs.readFile('example.txt', 'utf8', (err, data) => {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log("File contents: ", data);
});

console.log("This will print first, before the file is read.");
In this code:

The file is being read asynchronously.
Even though we start reading the file, Node.js doesn't wait for that to finish. It moves on to the next operation (console.log).
Once the file is read, the callback is executed, and the file content is printed.
The Event Loop Breakdown:
Timer phase: Executes code scheduled by setTimeout or setInterval.
I/O callbacks phase: Executes callbacks for completed I/O tasks.
Idle/Prepare phase: Internal phase for handling I/O.
Poll phase: Handles incoming events.
Check phase: Executes setImmediate callbacks.
Close callbacks: Executes the close event handlers (like socket.on('close', callback)).
